Effekt by example (#536)
effekt-lang/effekt: examples/features/loops.effekt.md

# Loops

> In Effekt, there is only a `while` loop expression built-in (that is completely standard).

Reviewer: Nitpick: the formulation of this sentence is pretty weird and it took me a while to understand it.
```suggestion
Effekt includes a (completely standard) built-in `while` loop expression as its sole native looping construct.
```

```
def fib(n: Int): Int = {
  var last = 0
  var current = 1
  var iters = 0
  while (iters < n) {
    val next = last + current
    last = current
    current = next
    iters = iters + 1
  } else { println("ran for " ++ show(iters) ++ " iterations") }
  last
}
```

```repl
fib(10)
```

A `while` loop consists a condition on which to continue the loop and an optional `else` branch that is run when the
`while` loop ended.

> Furthermore, there is a `loop` function defined in the standard library, you can use for infinite, breakable loops.

Reviewer: I think it's also worth it to show `each` / `repeat` here :)
I was also thinking about `.foreach` on lists, as that's a looping operation I use _all the time_, but I'm not sure it fits into this chapter.

```effekt:hidden
interface Event[A] {
  def receive(): Option[A]
}
record Job()
```

```
def worker() = loop {
  val packet = do receive[Job]()
  packet match {
    case Some(p) => println("processing request")

>     case None => do break()

Reviewer: Note that from #528 onward, you'll need to bind the label:
```scala
each(0, 100) { (i) {label} =>
     total = total + i;
     if (total > 15) label.break()
     println(i)
}
```

  }
}
```

> The operations `break` and `continue` have their usual semantics, except that they are handled by `loop` as operations of the algebraic effect `Control`.

Author: Thanks for taking your time to ask these insightful questions! It is very valuable for us to get feedback for newcomers to algebraic effects.

- `while` is a natively built-in constructor and does not use the `Control` effect by default. However, no one is stopping you from wrapping a while loop using this effect in a handler and defining your own behaviour :)
- See previous answer. Interestingly, `loop` is a handler. I invite you to look at the (relatively concise) implementation to perhaps reconcile it with your mental model:
https://github.com/effekt-lang/effekt/blob/master/libraries%2Fcommon%2Feffekt.effekt#L651-L677
- Yes, indeed. You can do that. Note, however, that the semantics of `Control` depend on the lexically nearest handler. If there is one "deeper nested" than loop, that one will handle `Control` instead. This is true for all effects, of course.

> The operations `break` and `continue` have their usual semantics, except that they are handled by `loop` as operations of the algebraic effect `Control`.

Reviewer 2: Cool! Is there any reason you all decided to separate out `while` into a built-in primitive in the first place?

> The operations `break` and `continue` have their usual semantics, except that they are handled by `loop` as operations of the algebraic effect `Control`.

Author: I am not aware of any particular reason. I would guess that `while` loops map nicely to some of the backends and can leverage the respective backend's optimisations.
